An internet satellite constellation is a large number of satellites orbiting the earth, communicating with devices or base stations on the ground, to provide internet connectivity to said devices. There are currently several companies planning on launching internet satellite constellations.

There are several pros and cons of launching these constellations. It can be argued that these constellations can help people in several ways, providing emergency services and increasing global connectivity. People also argue that launching all these satellites will pollute the earth, fill important orbits, and inflate the space debris problem. There are clear benefits and drawbacks of launching these massive constellations. This text will present the positive and negative aspects of continuing to launch more and bigger internet satellite constellations.

Crucially, internet satellite constellations can provide connectivity to emergency areas. Sheetz (2020) describes Starlink, one of the upcoming constellations, being used by emergency responders to provide internet connectivity to workers where no ground based connections exist. Sheetz writes that the internet was used by evacuated families for “wireless calling and internet access to file insurance claims.”

Despite providing important services, internet satellite constellations can also cause harm to the environment. To get the immense amount of satellites into operating orbit they have to be put into place by numerous rocket launches. David (2017) states that there has been insufficient research into emissions caused by launching rockets. Nevertheless they go on saying that there are several areas of environmental impact of rockets. Firstly, some rocket engines emit particles into all parts of the atmosphere on the way to space. The particles can accumulate in certain parts of the atmosphere and absorb radiation from the sun, warming up the atmosphere and “likely leading to ozone loss“. Furthermore, rocket and satellite debris reentering the atmosphere vaporizes and leaves unnatural particles in the atmosphere.

Furthermore, this huge increase in the number of satellites in the sky can be devastating for astronomers. Siegel (2020) states that the upcoming constellations are “unlike anything the astronomy community has ever faced before”. They go on to state that one astronomer has already gotten twenty percent of their observation time impacted by the early stages of an internet constellation, with more satellites to come. This does, and will continue to apply to both amateur astronomers and professionals alike. This could lead to space being the only safe astronomical area remaining. Furthermore, Siegel discusses these constellations being launched and funded by independent companies which are fueled by profits, not the well being of astronomy. The consequence of this is that these companies may not act to mitigate the light pollution problem without being required by law to do so.

Positively, internet satellite constellations provide global connectivity. According to Murdock (2020), A native american tribe who got access to Starlink says that it “catapulted [them] into the 21st century”, when they got further integrated into the current connected society. Thompson (2014) explains that “the Internet is a powerful source of information and communication” and is crucial for industry, tourism, and education. Concretely, Murdock quotes vice chairman of the Hoh tribe, Melvinjohn Ashue, that says that “Our youth are able to do education online [and] participate in videos. Telehealth is no longer going to be an issue, as well as tele-behavioral health, tele-mental health.”

On the other hand, the increase of satellites contributes to the growing problem of space debris. Space debris is simply objects in orbit which can not be controlled. According to ESA (n.d.), many launches leave uncontrollable parts of rockets in orbit, making them space debris. Abandoned satellites are also sometimes left in space. These in themselves aren’t a major problem but, as ESA explains that when two objects collide at orbital speeds, they can create thousands of smaller pieces of debris. They continue stating that “as the debris population grows, more collisions will occur” which leads to a feedback loop of increased space debris. As a consequence, if the space debris problem gets increasingly  out of hand, it will prohibit further launches which will in turn decrease global connectivity by limiting updates of systems like communication satellites and GPS services.

In conclusion, launching internet satellite constellations can aid in emergency situations and lead to a globally connected world, however doing so can also cause problems for our fragile environment, hinder astronomical research, as well as prevent further space activity if the space debris problem gets out of control. Clearly it’s hard to say if internet satellites provide a positive or negative service to humanity. One thing is clear however, there are many companies pushing the internet satellite technology forward and they are going to stop for nothing.